Frequently Asked Questions: MPEG, Patents, and Audio Coding
Eric Scheirer -- MIT Media Laboratory -- eds@media.mit.edu
Version 0.9, 21 Oct 1998

-----------------------------------------------

This FAQ is written to try to inject some sanity in what is becoming
an increasingly heated discussion about patent rights surrounding
MPEG technology, especially for audio compression.

I am not a lawyer, and thus my answers should not be taken as
legal advice.  I am an independent source knowledgable of both
audio coding technology (I developed one of the coders in MPEG-4)
and the MPEG process (I am a US delegate to MPEG and an Editor
of MPEG-4).  I have never received any payment from a company
discussed in this FAQ; my current employ (Oct 1998) is as a
graduate student at the MIT Media Lab.

The answers are not provided on behalf of the Media Lab, MPEG, or
any other organization.  I wrote them myself, and they're only my
opinions.

This is version 0.9 of 21 Oct 1998.

--------------------------------------------------

Contents:

  0     For more information
  1-18  MPEG-1 Layer 3 (MP3) and patents
  19-24 MPEG-2 AAC and patents
  25-29 MPEG-4 and patents
  30-32 Content rights (the RIAA) and MPEG standards

0. Where can I get more information on MPEG standards?

The ISO home page is
     <http://www.iso.ch>.
The MPEG home page is
     <http://www.cselt.it/mpeg>.
The MPEG Audio home page is
     <http://www.tnt.uni-hannover.de/project/mpeg/audio>.
The "MPEG resource page" (a little out-of-date on AAC and MPEG-4) is
     <http://www.mpeg.org> .
A page of information on MP3 licenses is at
    <http://www.mpeg.org/index.html/mp3-licensing-faq.html>

1. What is MP3?

MP3 is more properly known as MPEG-1 Layer 3 or MPEG-2 Layer 3.  It
is a standard for the transmission and decoding of compressed audio.
The remainder of this FAQ uses the more common "MP3" name for this
standard.

2. What is MPEG-3?

There is no such thing as MPEG-3.  While in the process of working
on MPEG-2, MPEG requested another work item to cover high-definition
television standards.  However, when MPEG-2 was finished, it was
found to satisfy the requirements and MPEG-3 was cancelled.

3. How does MP3 work?

The MPEG standards only cover *format* and *decoding*, not
*encoding*.  Thus, this question is really asking how to
store, format, and decode an MP3 file.

The MP3 format is fairly simple; it contains the description of
a number of different types of sound data (especially spectral
frames) represented in a concise format.  To decode this, you
create the sound that's described in the format.

An overview of the format can be found:

   K. Brandenburg, G. Stoll, "ISO-MPEG-1 Audio: a generic standard
   for coding of high quality digital audio." J. Aud. Eng. Soc
   42:10, pp. 780-794, Oct. 1994.

and of course ISO (see above) is happy to sell you a copy of
the formal specification.

There is no fixed method for creating an MP3 file.  If you like, you
can allocate the bits with a Ouija board; this is perfectly
compliant to the standard.  The sound you get from decoding this
file may leave something to be desired, though.    

To arrive at a good, compact sound description is a very complex
process.  MP3 is one of a type of compression scheme known as the *perceptual
coder*.  A good introduction to this technique for the scientifically-
minded reader is:

  N. Jayant, J. Johnston, R. Safranek, "Signal compression based
  on models of human perception."  Proc IEEE 81:1385-1421, Oct 1993.

A full understanding of the technology requires a good background
in signal processing and psychoacoustics (the science of hearing).
Briefly:

  - the sound is transformed into the frequency domain
  - a hearing model is used to evaluate what parts of the
    sound are "most important"
  - bits are allocated to the various parts in decreasing order
    of importance, with the most important parts of the sound
    receiving the most bits
  - all of the bits are compressed with a noiseless coding scheme
    (Huffman coding, sort of like 'gzip')
  - the result is packed into the standardized format

The hearing model and the bit-allocation are, obviously, the
most difficult parts of this, the parts which most directly
control the sound quality, and the parts that are most actively
protected by patent rights holders.

5. Who owns MP3?

MPEG standards are owned by the International Standardisation
Organisation (ISO) <http://www.iso.ch>.  The technology to create
them is donated by the companies that participate in the MPEG
process.  Any company is free to develop contributions that improve a
standard, and MPEG has a formal process by which it evaluates
them.

6. Who is FhG?

FhG is Fraunhofer Gesellschaft, "the leading organization of applied
research in Germany".  They contributed technology to the development
of the MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 audio standards.

7. So FhG owns MP3?

No.  ISO owns and controls the MPEG standards (see #5).  FhG was
one company to contribute technology to the MPEG-1 and MPEG-2 audio
standards.

8. Does FhG own a patent on MP3?

No.  They own patents on technologies that are part of MPEG standards.
Other companies also own patents on other parts of MPEG standards.
There is no single company controlling MP3 or the other MPEG
standards.

9. Can FhG enforce their patents on MP3?

There are two questions here: Are FhG's patents valid, and does the
inclusion of their technology in MPEG put limits on their ability to
enforce patents?

For the second, no; under the agreement through which they made the
technology available to MPEG they are allowed to pursue their patent
claims.

The first is a more difficult question.  There is serious question and
little precedent in many countries surrounding software patents.  I
have not looked at the specific claims made in FhG's patents; there
may or may not also be issues of prior art that impact on the
question.  It is not possible to say definitively that their patents
are valid; however, if I were to go into business, I would definitely
err on the side of caution in such a matter.

10. Should FhG enforce their patents on MP3?

This is a moral question, not a legal one.  Different people have
different opinions.  The coder I developed at the Media Lab has
been released into the public domain, at my request.  On the other
hand, the Media Lab is part of a university, not a for-profit endeavor.
If you want to use MP3 to steal copyrighted music, it's not
clear to me that you're in much of a position to make moral
judgments on others.

11. If other companies also own patents on MP3 technology, why is
    FhG the only company actively pursuing claims?

This is up to each company of course, and only speculation is
possible.  Some choices might be:

  - Other companies want their technology to be freely available.
  - Other companies don't care if free software infringes their
      patents.
  - Other companies are going to pursue claims, but haven't gotten
      around to it yet.
  - Other companies are waiting to see what happens with FhG's claims.
  - Other companies are letting FhG do their dirty work for them.

You can probably come up with some more of your own.

12. Why does ISO accept patented technology into their standards?

Because otherwise no one would contribute to ISO, and private coding
technology would be superior to open standards.  By allowing companies
to contribute technology, but still make money through patent rights,
MPEG can develop the best audiovisual coding technology in the
world and it can be open for all to use.  If ISO did not accept
patented technology, it will remain as "trade secrets" under the
control of a single company.

ISO does require that all the technology accepted be licensable on
fair and equal terms; however, this is "fair and equal" to the big
companies that participate in MPEG, not to the hobbyist.  There are
few hobbyists or those who represent them participating in ISO.
(There is no barrier to doing so -- perhaps someone should do this!)

13. Why does FhG patent their technology?  The world would be better
    if it were free!

Is it FhG's responsibility to make the world better, or only to make
money?

14. Why do international patent authories allow software techniques
    to be patented?

Because a significant amount of work and money goes into developing
the techniques involved in this and other software.  Because patents
are actually a way of sharing information -- techniques that are
not patented are often simply held as trade secrets.  Because patent
law is in a state of flux on this topic, and many patent examiners
don't really understand the issues involved.

Many readers of this FAQ live under democratic governments, where it
is possible that these sorts of laws could be changed, given enough
time and organization.  Several groups are already organized to
attempt to make this happen.

15. If I don't use their source, can I make my own MP3 decoder without
    paying FhG?

Legally, FhG may or may not have rights regarding patented technology
that is necessary to make an MP3 decoder.  If they do, it is within
their right to enforce it and prevent you from making any MP3 decoder,
whether or not you had help from them to do it.

16. If I don't use their source, can I make my own MP3 encoder without
    paying FhG?

If you infringe on their techniques, it is within their rights to seek
recourse, whether or not you had help from them, or whether or not
you intentionally or knowingly infriged.

17. If I don't use any of their techniques, can I make my own MP3
    encoder without paying FhG?

Yes.

18. If the open source community develops a new compression standard,
    can we use it without paying FhG?

Only if it doesn't infringe on FhG's patents.  These patents may or
may not be tied to specific techniques in MP3; if they are more
general than MP3, then it doesn't matter what coding standard you are
using, you are still infringing their patent rights.

"Open source" and "free" are not the same thing.  For example, for
MPEG-4 (see below) free source code is available that shows you how to
make an encoder and decoder.  This is not *truly* open source, since
the ISO maintains a copyright, and you can only use it to develop
conforming MPEG products, but it's better than a sharp stick in the
eye.  But to distribute or sell a product based on the standard, you
still have to (legally) pay licensing fees to the patent holders.

19. What is MPEG-AAC?

AAC is the new Advanced Audio Coding standard from MPEG (finished
April 1997).  It provides much better quality at the same bitrate
than MP3, or the same quality at 50-70% of the bitrate (file size).
I'm not aware of any formal listening test that shows any coder
to be better than AAC in terms of quality at a bitrate.

AAC has been shown in independent tests to be superior to AC-3 and
Lucent PAC coding:

  Soulodre et al, "Subjective Evaluations of State-of-the-Art
  Two-Channel Audio Codecs".  J. Aud. Eng. Soc 46:3, pp. 164-177
  (March 1998).

MPEG's own testing shows that at 128 kb/s stereo, AAC meets the
European Broadcasting Union's standard of "indistinguishable
quality".  This is a laxer criterion than statistical undetectibility;
AAC does not quite reach this latter (very strict) standard at
128 kb/s stereo.

20. Who owns MPEG-AAC?

MPEG standards are owned by the International Standardisation
Organisation (ISO) <http://www.iso.ch>.  The technology to create
them is donated by the companies that participate in the MPEG
process.  Any company is free to develop contributions that improve a
standard, and MPEG has a formal process by which it evaluates
them.

21. Who developed MPEG-AAC?

ISO-MPEG developed the AAC standard.  Among the many contributing
companies were FhG, AT&T, Dolby, Sony, the University of Hannover,
and NEC.  FhG was "in charge" of the project in terms of
integrating and optimizing contributions.

22. Who holds patents on AAC?

Presumably, at least some of the companies who contributed technology
to the AAC standard.

23. Can companies prevent me from writing encoders and decoders for
AAC?

See answers 9-14 above.  The situation is no different than for
MP3.  There are indications that companies may be somewhat more
aggressive about pursuing patent infringement on AAC decoders than
they have been for MP3 decoders.

24. How can I find out about getting licenses to use AAC?

The AAC "licensing authority" is managed by Dolby.  Send email
to <aacla@dolby.com>.

25. What is MPEG-4?

MPEG-4 is the newest MPEG audio standard (there's also an MPEG-4
video standard and MPEG-4 systems standard, of course), which
reached Final Draft in Oct 1998.

Here is an overview taken from the beginning of the standard
itself:

   MPEG-4 is a new kind of audio standard that integrates many
   different types of audio coding: natural sound with synthetic
   sound, low bit-rate delivery with high-quality delivery, speech
   with music, complex soundtracks with simple ones, and traditional
   content with interactive and virtual-reality content.  By
   standardizing individually sophisticated coding tools as well as a
   novel, flexible framework for audio synchronization, mixing, and
   downloaded post-production, the developers of the MPEG-4 Audio
   standard have created new technology for a new, interactive world
   of digital audio.

   MPEG-4, unlike previous audio standards created by ISO/IEC and
   other groups, does not target a single application such as
   real-time telephony or high-quality audio compression.  Rather,
   MPEG-4 Audio is a standard that applies to *every* application
   requiring the use of advanced sound compression, synthesis,
   manipulation, or playback.  As the MPEG-4 Audio tools are
   integrated with the rest of the MPEG-4 standard, exciting new
   possibilities for object-based audio coding, interactive
   presentation, dynamic soundtracks, and other sorts of new media,
   are enabled.

There are four technical Subparts to MPEG-4 Audio:

  Speech: CELP and HVXC techniques for low-bitrate speech coding
  General Audio: Perceptual high-quality coding 
  Structured Audio: Flexible, high-quality, low-bitrate audio synthesis
  Text-to-Speech Interface: A standard for sending synthetic speech

In addition, there's a tool for post-production, synchronization,
and mixing of audio in the MPEG-4 Systems standard called AudioBIFS,
and a tool for the management and protection of intellectual
property rights.

26. Who owns MPEG-4?

MPEG standards are owned by the International Standardisation
Organisation (ISO) <http://www.iso.ch>.  The technology to create
them is donated by the companies that participate in the MPEG
process.  Any company is free to develop contributions that improve a
standard, and MPEG has a formal process by which it evaluates
them.

27. Who contributed technology to MPEG-4?

Many companies.  Here is a partial list:

Speech: Philips, NEC
GA:     FhG, Univ. Hannover, Sony, Yamaha.
        (GA also integrates all of the AAC technology, and presumably
	 makes use of all the patents that AAC does)
SA:     MIT Media Lab, Creative Labs
TTSI:   ETRI Korea

28. What is the patent status of MPEG-4?

Details are hazy, but will firm up as the marketplace matures.
Presumably most companies will continue to pursue their patent
rights.  Notably, one of the major Subparts (Subpart 4, Structured
Audio) has been placed in the public domain by its developer,
the MIT Media Lab, and anyone is welcome to use it for free.  The
same is true of the AudioBIFS technology in the Systems standard.

29. Is Yamaha's TwinVQ part of MPEG-4?

The TwinVQ technology was integrated with the AAC technology and
some other new things to form the MPEG-4 GA tool.  A .VQF file
is not a legal MPEG-4 bitstream.

30. Who is the RIAA?

The RIAA is the Recording Industry Association of America.  They're
a trade association that looks out for the welfare of the record
industry.

31. Does RIAA own patents in MPEG technology?

Not that I know of.  It is unlikely since RIAA is not a technical
group.

32. Why is the RIAA upset about MP3?

Because people are using the MP3 standard to steal copyrighted
music.  This is a copyright issue, not a patent issue.  More
in-depth discussion of copyright will have to wait for a different
FAQ.